---
title: "Wood, Cities, and Trade: An Economic Analysis of the Global Urban Demand for Wood Products and the Dynamics of International Wood Trade"
collection: publications
category: documents
permalink: /publication/2023-12-19-mathieu-thesis
excerpt: 'This thesis assesses the capacity of wood trade flow models to support sustainable resource management by examining their theoretical foundations, factor coverage, and data quality, while proposing new approaches that integrate urban dynamics, improve trade data reliability, and enhance the modeling of the global wood economy.'
date: 2023-12-19
venue: 'Doctoral dissertation'
paperurl: 'https://hal.univ-lorraine.fr/tel-04594758v1'
citation: 'Mathieu, V. (2023). <i>Wood, Cities, and Trade: An Economic Analysis of the Global Urban Demand for Wood Products and the Dynamics of International Wood Trade</i> (Doctoral dissertation, Universit&eacute; de Lorraine).'
---

**Abstract**

To achieve sustainable development and sustainable natural resource management, a thorough understanding of the various factors that contribute to the wood economy, as well as an accurate forecast of wood supply and demand, are essential. Such analyses rely on models, referred to in this thesis as "wood trade flow models" when studying wood production, trade and consumption. The use of models to explain and predict economic phenomena comes up against several methodological difficulties. Given these difficulties, how can we assess a model's ability to conduct such analyses? This thesis considers three essential and interdependent aspects of modeling to assess a model's ability to achieve its objectives. The first is whether the theoretical framework of models can be tested empirically. The second aspect is to determine whether a model takes into account factors that are important for the heuristic and predictive analysis of economic phenomena. The third aspect concerns the availability and quality of data on which a theory can be tested and from which factors can be identified and quantified. This thesis is structured around these three aspects and is divided into four chapters. The first two chapters deal with two of the modeling aspects considered: (i) the factors taken into account or to be taken into account in modeling the wood economy, and (ii) the development of models based on empirically testable theories. The last two chapters deal with the third aspect of modelling: data quality and its implications for modelling. The aim of this thesis is to conduct a review of the factors considered in modeling wood trade flows, and to propose an economic analysis of urban demand for wood and international trade in wood products. Chapter 1 presents a meta-analysis of wood trade flow modeling concepts. It concludes that economic models rely on a narrow set of factor categories, thus neglecting other important factors, such as urbanization. Chapter 2 develops a spatial model of urban demand for wood. By taking urbanization into account as a factor in the global wood economy, the model offers a realistic and accurate representation of forest economic phenomena, suggesting a crucial role of urban dynamics in shaping the global wood economy. Chapter 3 highlights several discrepancies between export and import data, and proposes a method for accounting for measurement errors in trade analyses. This chapter suggests that these discrepancies are significant, and that failing to correct models for errors in trade data biases model results. Chapter 4 performs a network analysis of the roundwood trade. Although this analysis is primarily descriptive, it provides a realistic and mechanistic model for assessing the structure of the trade network and its dynamics. The scientific contributions of this thesis are threefold: it proposes new methods for modeling the global wood economy, integrates urban dynamics as a factor shaping the global wood economy, and highlights a need for best practices in the analysis of wood product trade. It addresses global issues by highlighting the need to anticipate future urban demand for wood, questions the effectiveness of economic regulation policies applied to forests and wood products, and suggests commercial strategies aimed at minimizing market risks.